This
is Professor Larry Hoover of Sam Houston State
University, November 15, 1984. This interview
concerns crowd control and changes in crowd
control during the 1960s. Dr. Hoover, could you
please give me your background, such as where you
were born and when schools attended, and how you
made your way to Sam Houston State University? I
was born in 1945 and raised in the state of
Michigan. I entered college at Michigan State
University, majoring in what was then called
police administration and public safety. Since
that time, all these programs have modified the
terminology to reflect criminal justice as the
title of the degree. Intending to go to law school
at the University of Michigan, completed my
degree in police science administration and was
out of money. So I went to work for the Lansing,
Michigan Police Department. Lansing, Michigan
is the city of a metropolitan area of about
200,000, very much like Austin, Texas. It's the
capital city of the state. It has a large
university there. Unlike Austin, there's a fair
amount of heavy industry in that area, the
automobile industry.
Went on to police department, given my major, went
on to police department and intended to stay about
six months, save up money, and then go on to law
school. One thing led to another and ended up
staying in police work. Went back out to Michigan
State, took a master's degree in what was then
called criminal justice, then received a PhD in
higher educational administration. Spent
approximately four years on the Lansing Police
Department in several capacities, primarily in
the police patrol division, however. and left
there for the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers
Training Council. It's a state organization
which controls, coordinates police training in
that state. There are analogous organizations in
every state now, including Texas. Spent a year and
a half there, and then went on the faculty at
Michigan State University for five years, and
left there in 1977, came to Sam Houston State
University, where I'm now a professor of criminal
justice here. What riots have you been in and how
were you involved?
I was on the patrol officer in the Lansing Michigan
Police Department between 1967 and 1971.
In that time period we experienced two distinct
kinds of disturbances. One were the Riots, I guess
if we could call them that, in the black
neighborhoods, the black ghetto riots of the late
60s, which did occur in Lansing as well as other
cities. Of course, the riots in Detroit received
national attention when army units had to be
called in to finally restore order in Detroit.
Forty-some people died in the disturbances in
Detroit, but virtually every other city in
Michigan at that time experienced similar
disturbances, although on, obviously, a smaller
scale. A second kind of disturbance were the
demonstrations with regard to the United States'
involvement in the Vietnam War. With a very large
university, Michigan State University,
immediately adjacent to the city of Lansing, we
experienced several uh... disturbances
demonstrations which became disturbances and
uh... i participated in i suppose three or four of
those in terms of trying to affect crowd control
the ghetto riots are a little hard more difficult
to to to quantify uh... in lansing we did not
experience a a uh... a riot which had a given time
frame to place around it. It wasn't as if we had
three days of looting and burning, but rather
throughout the summer of 1968 and summer of 1969,
we experienced periodic disturbances. And I
suppose I ended up in riot gear and assigned to that
area 20 times during those two summers. OK. How did
you as a policeman feel going into a riot or
potential riot situation? Afraid. Afraid. I
think one of the things that is not well understood
about confrontations between police and crowds,
hostile crowds, demonstrators, is the amount of
fear that the police have. You see the police
appear in riot gear with helmets and with batons,
sidearms on their waist. They come out in force, 50
or 60 officers, and the assumption is made that
those individuals are calm, cool, collected, are
perfectly confident of their own safety.
Whenever that's not the case, in fact, they're
very much afraid. One of the anomalies of
attempting to control civil disturbances is the
fact that a police officer is limited in the amount
of force that he can use. the fact that you have a gun
with you is probably the greatest threat that you
experience because the overwhelming fear is that
the crowd will manage to isolate you, will either
beat and kick you to death, which has occurred, or
someone will grab your firearm, someone will grab
your revolver and use it on you. So the police,
whenever they approach that kind of a situation,
they're scared to death. And they react
appropriately. And I think that's something we
need to understand about the psychology of crowd
control, is that in any textbook one looks at,
articles about this issue, that are entitled
Psychology of Crowd Control, it's a one-way
perspective. It's written about the psychology
of the crowd, not the psychology of the
controlling agents. And dealing with the
psychology of the controlling agents and the fear
that they have is every bit as important as dealing
with the crowd. I recall on an anecdotal basis, I
can't resist noting, that there was a massive
march scheduled from the campus of Michigan State
University to the State Capitol building in
Lansing. It's a distance probably of four miles, I
would guess. And of course, every law enforcement
agency in the area were mobilized. And consistent
with policy at that time, one had a minimum number,
as long as the demonstration was peaceful, one had
a minimum number of officers on the street. You
tried to keep a very low profile so that you didn't
beget confrontation, so it did not appear as
though you were challenging the crowd's right to
assemble, freedom of speech. And so a few officers
were assigned for traffic control to escort them
down the main street of town, similar to Congress
Avenue over in Austin, if you're familiar with
that. What year was this? Best of my recollection,
this would have been 1968,
part of the series of demonstrations occurring
around the country in conjunction with the
Democratic National Convention and so forth.
They had a group of us, probably 50, 60 officers. We
were assembled in the basement of City Hall. If we
were needed, if the crowd became unruly, then they
would muster us. We would have been mustered out to
try to effect control. And an officer next to me had
a reasonable sense of humor. turned and, I have to
add, we just told that the estimated size of the
crowd was 20,000. And the officer next to me turned
and said, well, there's altogether maybe 100 of
us. Given 20,000 of them, that means we're
outnumbered 201. I just wanted to tell you,
though, that you're outnumbered 400 to 1 because
I'm going to turn and run like hell. And it's that
story. We laughed about it, but it was kind of
laughing about it that was done in a sort of a, oh,
I'm not quite sure what the right term is, but there
was a certain amount of, real fear that went, we
were laughing at death staring in the face, and it
really wasn't all that humorous. Yes,
definitely. Did the feeling of placement change
over the sixties, or was it pretty much the same?
Well, I think we got, as we gained experience with
it, we became more confident, and more competent
and confident, both, and one is certainly as
important as the other, related to one another.
recognized that most police officers
right now, in 1984, had never experienced an
unruly crowd of any size, and never had to affect
crowd control where they were stirring it up, a
large demonstration. In American society, these
events occur sporadically enough, even in times
of, relatively speaking, civil unrest. They're
still rare enough that most officers have not had
experience in dealing with them. Most
departments have not had experience in dealing
with them. Consequently, you make all the classic
mistakes those first couple times around.
Generally speaking, by the time you've gained
experience, it's all over with. The issue has
passed. It's been the history since, certainly in
the last 20 years at least. Whatever the issue has
been has become moot, and the opportunity to pass
that experience along does not exist. Now, in
terms of specific tactical changes, I would say
no. The tactics that were used were probably the
same throughout. The difference was in terms of
the way those tactics were employed, the
confidence with which we approached the scenes,
how competent we were. We knew the right things to
do. That is the textbook response from the outset.
The point was that the psychology, the fear, the
confusion, that ensued. In some cases, lack of
equipment, particularly in the very early times,
begets serious problems. Officers, for example,
officers are instructed not to speak to anyone in a
crowd. That sometimes, the temptation becomes
overwhelming, someone's yelling profanities in
your face to give them a word back and uh it takes a
couple times to to learn i suppose that that's not
going to get you anywhere it's not going to give you
be a source of any self-satisfaction to you and
when those lessons are learned you do tend to
become better at crowd control you've already i
know you've already touched on it but what was the
the core psychology of the police how did they feel
towards each other, how they feel as a group when
they went into a situation. Well, one of the
interesting points that I would make is that the
police are placed in a role, not only in terms of
crowd control, riot, civil disturbances, but in
terms of their daily operating environment, are
placed in a role of maintaining the status quo. And
as such, it doesn't matter how you feel about the
particular cause. It doesn't matter how you feel
about the social situation in a black ghetto. Your
role is maintenance of order, and that's the
mandate that you're given. You hold up your right
hand and swear that you're going to uphold the
Constitution of the United States, a particular
state, and the statutory law that pertains
thereto. One can be very sympathetic to the
demonstrators. One can be very sympathetic to the
rioters. But you're going to enforce the law. And
as such, one is caught in a position of, the
academic term would be some cognitive
dissonance. Although you personally may have
been sympathetic to the protest against the
Vietnam War, you personally may have felt that we
should get out of Vietnam. Nevertheless, your job
was to make sure that a demonstration with regard
to that issue did not get out of hand. That puts you
in an inevitable conflict position. Now what
happens as a civil disturbance situation, gains
momentum as it progresses and the minutes go into
hours and hours into days,
there are sufficient transgressions by the other
side, physical transgressions, assaults,
profanities, rocks hurled at you, efforts to, you
know, efforts to injure you and your colleagues.
And you don't know them as uniforms. You know them
as people who have children after raising and
everything else. And you stand and I stand and look
to my side and I see a good friend, Jim Harkin, who
had three children, all under five, take a brick on
the helmet and even with that helmet, knock him
unconscious and suffered a serious concussion
hauling him away from the ambulance. It doesn't
take you very long to get angry. You may be
sympathetic to the general cause, but you get
angry at the people over there. Because you are
treated in a law enforcement role as if you're a
non-human entity, as if you're a machine inside a
uniform. And that's resented. You resent that.
And so you find officers who... who are
sympathetic to the cause, nevertheless striking
out. The problem of controlling the police, of
keeping the nightsticks down, gets to be a very
serious problem. I'll give you a case in point
from more recent past. We had, in the past year, a
march in Austin by the Ku Klux Klan. Get it out yet?
The Ku Klux Klan. We had several groups in Austin,
as well as the general public, objecting strongly
to that and were determined to harass the Klan on
their march. The Klan had a right to march, a right
to assemble. And the police have to protect the
right of the Ku Klux Klan to assemble, whether they
agree with them or not. There was constant
harassment of the Klan as they marched down the
route in Austin. And sometimes that gets very
unpleasant. Bags of feces were tossed, for
example. And some of it hits a Klan, and
occasionally police officers walking beside a
Klansman gets hit. And the police officers
reacted in a very predictable way. They became
angry at the people who were attempting to stop the
Klan from marching. Now, I assure you that the
Austin Police Department, the caliber of
officers on that Austin Police Department, are
not sympathetic towards the KKK or their cause.
and are far more sympathetic, are very
sympathetic to the ideological position of the
crowd that's attempting to stop the march. But
they were cast into that role, an adversarial
role, with the crowd, and a supportive role, in
essence, with the KKK, since they were charged
with protecting the KKK. And as you know, towards
the end of the march, while there was an incident in
which police lines, it was an effort to break
police lines. And officers attempting to effect
an arrest of one individual started flailing some
nightsticks, probably took It looked bad on
national television. It looked like they were
just wailing the devil out of the people. In
effect, if you take that, and I watched a
slow-motion version of that that Frank Dyson had,
showed the chief's administrative conference
here a few months ago, and actually you're dealing
with maybe three or four swings with a nightstick
that were not necessary. I won't say probably not
necessary. Were not necessary to affect the
arrest. But the officers were involved in a
one-on-one as a mob surrounding them, probably
20, 30 people. You're dealing with three or four
officers. And again, the assumption is those
officers are actually confident of their own
safety, have no fear at all, and in fact, are scared
to death that somebody's going to grab a gun or grab
the nightstick and wail on them or whatever.
The police. will inevitably come into conflict
with a crowd that is attempting to make
a political statement through civil
disobedience. No question about that. This leads
right into, how do you define a police riot? What
are the signs you can see that bring that down?
Well, we've probably only had One incident, a
police riot in the United States since the Second
World War, and I don't know, I'm not familiar
enough with history prior to that to know for sure.
And that was in 1968 at the Democratic National
Convention in Chicago. A police riot occurs
whenever individual officers cannot be
controlled by their supervisors. And that's what
happened in Chicago. It became supervisory
orders were, in effect, ignored on the street in
Chicago. And individual officers were effecting
street justice, clubbing demonstrators, and so
forth. That's a fascinating incident, by the way,
in terms of the full history of that. And again, the
police psychology surrounding that incident.
Few people are aware of the fact that deliberate
efforts were made by some of the extremist groups.
And I hasten to add that the demonstrators in
Chicago consisted of a real mix of people, which is
part of the problem, from extremist groups who
were determined to force violence, feeling that
was a part of a strategy to effect political
change, to curious onlookers.
Efforts were made to obtain home addresses of
police officers. Threats were made that while the
officers were controlling the demonstrations,
the extremist groups would, quote, get their
families. Families, generally the police banded
together, although it was not an official city
policy, the police banded together, and during
those Tuesday, Wednesday nights, whenever
things were at their worst, had moved their
families out of their homes. Now one of the things
that, the lesson there is when the police quit
cease to be bureaucrats, when the police are
personally threatened, are no longer simply
performing a bureaucratic role, but feel a
personal threat, they're going to be very
difficult to control. And they're not going to
play by the rules anymore. And if somebody starts
threatening your family, what you see is, even if
the threat is not specific, even if your
telephone's never rung at home, Even if you have no
direct evidence that that's going to occur, if
there's talk of doing that, then police officers
will react accordingly. Will simply strike out
against what they see as a symbolic assailants,
which are the demonstrators on the street. And
that's what happened in Chicago.
When and to what extent did training on crowd
psychology occur in the 60s? When was it stepped
up? recognized, first of all, that police
training was done only sporadically
before 1968, 69. As a point in fact, it was probably
some of the problems of civil disturbances which
beget
political action that mandates police training.
in virtually every state, police officers are
required by law to complete a certain minimum
number of hours of basic training. In addition to
that, there's available advanced in-service
training. Those laws were passed by and large in
1969 through 1972 and were not entirely a product
of the difficulties the police experienced in
controlling civil disturbances, but that
certainly was a contribution. The fact that that
inadequate or inappropriate police action,
often aggravated situations that aggravated
civil disturbances rather than assisted in
quelling them, was part of the impetus to get
mandatory basic training laws for our police
passed, part of the impetus for trying to recruit
college-educated individuals in the police
service, which is now very widespread. So the
training which was received, and I'm giving you a
long-winded answer to your question, but it's
important to recognize that the largest agencies
generally had basic training and had had since the
1950s, at least basic training. Relatively
little, if any, in-service training was done. So
the police approached that whole era, 1965
through 1970, essentially untrained in crowd
control. Individual officers, at least, had not
had specific training. Now, once disturbances
started, why training programs were geared up
very quickly and agencies would offer one-day
seminars or would offer roll call training to
officers in terms of behavior during crowd
control situations and so forth. Do you think this
was an important change? Did it really help? No.
Primarily, what one must deal with in terms of
police The reason I say that is the tactics for
crowd control were known despite the training,
and the supervisory personnel were apprised and
were aware of what tactics should be employed. The
difficulty was in dealing with the psychology of
the officers, not in the officers not knowing what
a wedge was or what the proper way to hold a
nightstick was. It was in the officers'
psychological approach to aggressive crowds,
and that was really the primary source of the
difficulty. Okay. Which crowds were the easiest
to handle and which type of crowds were the worst to
handle? The different, you know, the race and the
war crowd, war demonstrators? Well, the war
demonstrators were probably easier to handle
than the race riot situations, unquestionably
were easier to handle than the race riot
situations. One of the things that goes
unrecognized, and I, to the best of my knowledge,
Not one individual was killed by a police officer,
a civilian police officer in this country, during
the course of the war demonstrations. And we
often, we talk about police riots and police being
out of control during that era and how terrible it
was. That's a bunch of bunk. We did not have scores
of people laying dead on the streets. Compare that
to some of the experiences that have occurred in
Europe, some of the experiences which have
occurred in Japan, for example, and they've had
much worse experience. So despite the lack of
preparedness on the part of the American police,
despite the lack of equipment, despite the fear
that was engendered, the amount of alienation
that at that time existed between the police and
extremist war demonstrators, People were not
dying in the streets of the United States in 1967 to
1972.
The one incident where we had, of course, death
occur was at Kent State with the Ohio National
Guard. And I'll reiterate a point I made earlier.
You were dealing with a group of people, National
Guard, inexperienced and scared to death. And you
had, in essence, what we talk about, the agents of
the state, the military firing upon helpless
civilians. In effect, what you had was a bunch of
18-year-olds shooting at a bunch of other
18-year-olds. And there's a world of difference
in terms of one's perception and view of that
incident, depending upon what words are used, the
semantics that are used to describe the incident.
I don't excuse the actions of that unit of the Ohio
National Guard, but I certainly understand the
actions in terms of the fear that they
experienced. And again, if you look at the
videotapes of the situation, you say, oh my God,
here they are armed with rifles, and you've got a
bunch of college students. How could they
possibly feel threatened? But they do feel
threatened. And unquestionably, what happens is
a form of crowd psychology or mob psychology
occurred within the rank of the National Guard
whenever the first shot went off. And as of yet, I
don't believe it was ever established who fired
the first shot or why. For all we know, it could have
been an accidental discharge of a gun, but once
that first shot was fired, then a kind of crowd
psychology overcame the guard, and of course a
volley of shots were then fired. But it's very
important to note, first of all, even four people
dying during that era with the amount of potential
violence that could have occurred, the number of
bombings that were occurred, the number of
ambushes that occurred against police officers
where they were killed in ambush, and the fact that
only four people in the country died in
demonstrations is an outstanding record, and
it's even more interesting to note that no one died
at the hands of civilian police. That's good. I
know when Martin Luther King was assassinated,
several riots broke out. What kind of impact do you
think riots in other parts of the country have on
potential riot situations? Oh, without any
question, it's a chain reaction event.
We would, in Lansing, which is 90 miles from
Detroit, we would monitor the situation in
Detroit on an hour-by-hour basis during those hot
summer months in those years because we knew that
the minute disturbance broke out in Detroit, it
was very likely that we would have disturbances
occurring in Lansing. Yes, there is very much a
chain reaction that occurs in those kind of
instances.
The ghetto riots have a wholly different
character to them. In the first place, one tends
not to deal with aggregated mobs, with mobs
collected, a lot of people in one place. Rather,
you deal with small groups of young males. I don't
recall ever seeing a group larger than 10, for
example, in my experiences in trying to control
disturbances in the Black Ghetto in Lansing. And
that was true in Detroit as well, maybe somewhat
larger. The groups never operated as unified
mobs. Rather, you'd get looting that would break
out on a particular street, and it'd be a dozen
people in one store and a dozen people in another
store and so forth, rather than really a concerted
movement.
Even in those situations, though, there was...
there was a certain understanding which existed
about the level of force that was going to be used.
Undoubtedly, in certain cities in the Watts
section of Los Angeles, in Detroit, in Newark, New
Jersey, The rioting degenerated, the reaction of
the police degenerated such that there were
instances of shooting to kill. People died in all
those cities. In the majority of disturbances in
the country, though, no one shot to kill. We
responded, I recall responding on a couple of
instances. A typical tactic on the part of black
activists at that time was to set an automobile on
fire. It was parked on a street. Fire department
would get called. Fire department would respond.
During that era, the police naturally were called
automatically to accompany the fire department.
In fact, as a point in fact, in many cities, police
go automatically anyway for traffic control. But
in these instances, you would go in case there were
problems. And firemen would bail onto the truck.
You'd pull up in the patrol car and get out and look
around. And you'd hear shots go off. Everybody
dive for cover, take off. You get on the police
radio and call for backup and crouch down behind a
car. I never saw a bullet hole in a police car. I
never had a bullet crack on the pavement next to me.
They were shooting in the air. It was a kind of
situation where there was sort of a, at best I can
call it a tacit understanding, that we weren't
going to be killed as long as we didn't shoot to kill
back. And that was generally done. Now, I don't
want to get Pollyannish about this. People die.
And I don't want to exaggerate this, but in the
majority of instances, the vast majority of
instances, 99% of the instances, people could
have died but didn't because it was an
understanding on both sides you weren't going to
kill.
OK. You've already said a few of them, but what
factors can change a crowd's mood to violence
quickly? Things the police can do, things their
leader can do? Yeah, one is always cautious in
terms of crowd control. It's term in the
literature, trigger events. One of the tactics in
terms of crowd control is if police make a judgment
that a crowd is going to get out of hand, is to
attempt to go in and arrest leaders, to make
selective arrests. You always try to avoid mass
arrests if you can. And that's done, the way that's
done is to go in very quickly, grab somebody, drag
them off, and pull back immediately again, not
stay in immediate physical proximity of the
crowd. That tactic is...
is premised upon the notion that if you can remove
sources of instigation, specific sources of
instigation, you could probably keep a crowd
under control. In relatively few instances is a
crowd destined to riot, or destined to become
aggressive. It usually takes either someone
who's inciting the crowd, or an action on the
police, or in some cases they get out of control
over something that no one can control. Some event
occurs that finally incites the crowd to riot.
Police tactics include extreme restraint. I
mentioned previously, you don't even speak to
someone in a crowd. You try to keep a reasonable
distance back so that the direct physical
confrontation, physical contact does not occur.
In the early stages of a crowd, you operate with
minimum show of force at the point whenever
whenever the line is being crossed and the crowd is
being triggered into aggressive action, then you
show up with massive force, intimidating force is
the general tactic. So in general what you do is
have a small contingent, as few as three or four
officers, who might be standing in the vicinity of
the crowd, monitoring the crowd. If something
triggers the crowd or if it appears as though it's
inevitable that they're going to become
aggressive, Then you have waiting a block away in a
bus or in some other kind of public building or
whatever, a large contingent of officers to move
in very quickly. And whenever you move in, you try
to, there are certain rules of the road. You give
the crowd a route to escape. It's like you don't
trap a rattlesnake in the corner unless you want
him to strike at you. You don't trap a crow in the
corner unless you want them to strike. So you give
them a chance to escape. You try to subdivide the
crowd. You try to get into smaller and smaller
groups as you disperse them to break that up, to
sort of diffuse the mob psychology that occurs.
How did the demonstrators feel towards the police
before the police had done anything? And has that
changed over the 60s, during the decade?
As more riots went on, as the police came, there was
sudden hostility?
No, I would not say that there was extreme
hostility at the outset of a demonstration, even
over a period of time, even after there had been
several demonstrations.
dealing with two really very different kinds of
incidents, so we'll have to talk about each of them
separately. In the Vietnam protests, the Vietnam
War demonstrations, the crowd largely regarded
the police as part of the bigger game that was being
played. It was all a matter of gamesmanship.
As long as things were done within certain
parameters, as long as somebody wasn't dragged
off and being beaten, relatively speaking, peace
would prevail at those demonstrations. Now, if a
brick is thrown, and a police officer gets hurt,
and a police retaliate by clubbing someone, then
the level of violence tends to get on an escalating
spiral. But I don't think the crowds in the Vietnam
War protests approached the police intending to
harm the police. I don't think they approached the
police with extreme hostility. If anything, I
suppose they regarded the police as sort of, and
even among those who were totally taken up with the
rhetoric at the time, as... as dupes or lackeys of
the ruling elite who really were not evil in their
own right, but were just misled. And so did not
demonstrate any kind of hatred for the police. It
was interesting. I'll describe one incident to
you.
During one of the demonstrations out at Michigan
State University, There existed at Michigan
State a commercial strip, a campus strip, like is
common in so many campuses, bookstores and
t-shirt shops and the like, restaurants. And that
evening, the city council in East Lansing,
similar to College Station Bryan situation, the
city council in East Lansing had considered a
resolution opposing the Vietnam War. And I don't
know what even action was taken. But a large crowd
had shown up with that. Things got out of hand, got
unruly. A bunch of the college kids started
rocking a fire chief's car, red fire car that was
there. And before they finished rocking it, they
had turned it on its top. And at that point, why, the
whole area of police agencies were mobilized. Of
course, we had inter-jurisdictional compacts to
assist one another. Still do, of course, in those
situations. And the mob made the round down the
front of that college strip and through bricks,
stones, whatever, through the glass windows. And
so all the windows were broken out down this strip.
Now, interestingly, no looting occurred. No one
reached in and took so much as a t-shirt. But they
broke out the windows as an expression of protest,
an expression of rage, I suppose. We ended up
showing up in the scene and crossed a large,
divided avenue with a little boulevard, a grass
boulevard in the middle. On one side were all the
college students. That was the campus side. We
lined up in front of these stores, hypothetically
protect the stores, just keep watching the
situation. Well, the hours drug on, and this
happened to be in February, middle of the
wintertime. It was cold in Lansing, Michigan in
February. That night, the temperature was
somewhere around zero. And that probably kept the
size of the crowd down and kept the mood cool. In any
case, someone over the net size I thought was a
brilliant move, dreamed up a tactic. They baited
us over across the street, and I can't recall now
how they did it. whether they, as I recall, they
drug a box of bricks and dumped them in a pile or
something like that. And so we were committed to
removing any projectiles away. And so a group of
officers, probably 20, 30 officers, moved across
the street in typical wedge formation to retrieve
the bricks, to remove them so they wouldn't be
thrown at the police. Well, that movement brought
them and immediately underneath the student
union building and the students were prepared up
there they had drugged the fire hoses out at the
situation where you have fire hoses right in the
hallway they drug the fire hoses out when the
police got underneath the windows the student
union building they threw open the windows turned
on the valves and just sprayed 30-40 officers down
well at zero degrees you don't stay out there in
soaking wet clothes so we had to take those all had
to be retired but there were Students just broke
out laughing. And to be honest with you, over in the
police side, we broke out laughing as well. There
were incidences where it was almost a, that's part
of the gamesmanship involved. You weren't really
going to hurt each other. Although
a flying brick is certainly going to do some
damage. But I don't think even those who threw the
brick intended that they would kill a police
officer by throwing that brick, or permanently
maim a police officer by throwing that brick. OK.
Moving on to politics, LBJ was quoted in 1964
saying this is a tough time to be a police officer.
Do you agree with this statement and why? It
definitely was a tough time to be a police officer.
I fully agree with Lyndon Johnson's statement in
that regard. The primary reason was not any
immediate physical threat of policing the
demonstrations or policing the ghetto riots,
although that certainly was germane. problem was
the
amount of public hostility against you. I was just
a recent graduate of Michigan State and had gone on
the police department. And one would go out there
to demonstrations and be called every
conceivable name one could imagine. And this is
going to sound almost humorous, but it hurts your
feelings.
It's nice to say that one is insulated against
that, that you separate the bureaucratic role
from the personal role and all that, but you don't.
We all get caught up in our occupational roles and
identify with that occupational role. The amount
of hostility, the amount of alienation, the
outright hatred of the police in the black ghetto
was very difficult to cope with. One would show up
and you were Whether you wanted to be or not, you
were perceived as the Gestapo, as an agent of a
repressive and unjust state. And no one likes to be
in that role. There wasn't anything I could
personally do about the plight of blacks in the
United States, then or now, in the sense of massive
reform or leading massive reform. Yet one was
cast, and had then, and of course still have, a
great deal of sympathy towards that situation.
But yet you're cast, and you pull up on a scene, and
you're greeted with, well, it's the man. It's the
man. Everybody shut up. It's the man.
Who are you going to whip up on this time? Those kind
of comments. And threats from crowds in those
situations and so forth. Of course, every call you
responded to during that era, particularly
during much of July and August up north, we were
tense on. Because if a crowd started to gather at
all, you were very afraid it was going to turn into a
civil disturbance very quickly, and frequently
did. And it was hard to maintain psychological
balance in terms of, I'm doing the right thing. I'm
performing a needed role. This is an honorable
profession. The college kids are screaming at you
one time that you're supporting murder in
Southeast Asia, and the black residents are
screaming at you the next day that you're
perpetuating
poverty and exploitation.
That was the primary difficulty in being a
policeman during that era. What impact, if any,
did Johnson's administration have on crowd
control during the 60s? have any legislation that
would help support the placement on what you're
just talking about?
To be honest with you, I don't recall any national
legislation that was passed that was directly
pertinent to crowd control. Every
state, well, first of all, we're fine. We teach
criminal law classes over here. One of the things
that our faculty do is When we refer to any state, we
refer to it as the sovereign state of. So if we talk
about the state of Texas, we talk about the
sovereign state of Texas. And one of the reasons we
do that is to impress upon students the fact that in
terms of criminal statutes, we deal with 50
different systems in this country. Federal law
has limited applicability towards criminal law
enforcement. As such, laws that were applicable
towards crowd control were state statutes, and
all states have general statutes against
rioting, insurrection, and so forth. I just
simply don't recall any federal legislation that
had any impact out on the street level. Do you
remember any state changes while you were in the
force that you saw, whether it was psychological
or equipment?
The primary change, I don't recall any statutory
changes that had any particular effect. There
were statutes passed generally at that time. The
only one I can remember are statutes passed about
carrying gasoline away from gas stations and
containers, which statutes were passed which
forbid you from doing that during that particular
time. No, certainly equipment changes made some
difference. Problems that we faced initially,
and to some extent the police still face it, we're
not well equipped yet at all to deal with this.
Problem fades and interest in it fades and other
items take budgetary preference.
Unfortunately, the police in dealing with crowds
all too frequently find themselves either having
to use a stick or at the other extreme, deadly
force, with nothing in between available to them.
So the first time we went out to the
campus demonstrations at Michigan State
University, it rolled up in a paddy wagon and it was
stacked with shotguns with 12-oct buck in them.
Now that's absurd. You're not going to use it. You
don't want to use that. They weren't even
distributed, by the way. But even in terms of what
you've got in your holster, really in that kind of
situation, you'd rather not have
in your revolver regular ammunition. You'd be
better off with something that was less deadly.
Later, by the way, the department did purchase
burgeoning.